---
title: "My path to publish a theory paper"
permalink: /posts/2025/12/theory/
date: 2025-12-21
tags:
  - Diary
---

# 2025-12-21
I wanna keep this a running post on how I ultimately write a theoretical paper. Writing such a paper is my sticking
point; I feel it's hard for me and seeing others being able to do it makes me insecure. I sit with them in the same room
and I see I don't have anything intelligence wise less than them, yet I'm hopeless to even understand their papers. I
also feel like life doesn't help me in this regard either; I'm surrounded with people that don't have enough background 
and motive to understand their intuitions, at the same time insist on what they feel and persist on their gut feeling 
that is ungrounded and _obviously to me_ wrong. 

For example of one my insecurities I can point out to Bo Dai's or Amin Rakhsha's publications; elite and elegant.
I see them as humans and I see that I'm a human too but unable to do what they do, in spite of the fact that I want to.

I dunno. There is a voice in my head that says don't give up; maybe the journey has to be exactly like this; maybe it 
doesn't matter that you'll fail eventually but you tried; maybe if yu don't give up you'll get there eventually. I
dunno, I'll put what I got once in a while here till that paper is published or life made me abandon my yearning. I
just know that I won't be regretful of not trying.

Sorry for venting! It was all I could do today. I really tried to brainstorm, be precise
and formal but I failed today. There went nothing. Maybe venting could be a good coping mechanism. Let the time reveal.

# 2025-12-22
Today, the voice in my head says F you to giving up (sorry for my ungrace). It says knock and the door shall be opened.
It's so interesting; right after putting down the previous sentence and while I felt lost and hopeless, I did a mental 
vomit, connected the related topic and realized what PAML paper had done, so I could follow their procedure. It gave me
a direction and I made progress! The loss function is well in place!