---
title: "Some cool questions" 
permalink: /posts/2025/09/cl-qstns/ 
date: 2025-09-11 
tags:      
  - learning    
---


- An elementary theorem in number theory states that if two integers $m$ and $n$ are relatively prime (i.e., greatest common divisor equal to 1 ), then there exist integers $x$ and $y$ (positive or negative) such that $mx + ny = 1$. Using this theorem show the following:  
  A. If $m$ and $n$ are relatively prime then the set {$xm + ny : x, y$ positive integers} contains all but a finite number of the positive integers.  
  B. Let $J$ be a set of nonnegative integers whose greatest common divisor is $d$. Suppose also that $J$ is closed under addition, $m, n \in J \Rightarrow m + n \in J$. Then $J$ contains all but a finite number of integers in the set {$0, d, 2d,\dots$}.  
      
Source: [Introduction to Stochastic Processes](https://archive.org/details/introduction-to-stochastic-process-lawler/mode/1up?view=theater)  
  
_answer_.  
  
Part (A).  
  
First, note that if we want to contain only positive integers, then $n$ and $m$ must be nonnegative. If one of them is negative and the other is positive, we would inevitably contain the whole integers. Also, to rule out the trivial case, let us assume $n, m \geq 1$.  
  
Since $\mathsf{gcd} (n, m) = 1$, the great common divisor of any multiples of $n$ from $1n$ to $mn$ with $m$ is also one. In other words, the set $\{n, 2n, \dots, mn\}$ forms the residue system modulo $m$. Let $N$ be any nonzero integer, we have $N \equiv ny \pmod m$, where $1 \leq y \leq m$. Equivalently, we can say $N - ny = mx$ for some integer $x$.  
  
We know that since $1 \leq y \leq m$, $y$ is positive. On the other hand, if $N \geq mn + 1$, then $x = \frac{N - ny}{m} > 0$, hence $x$ is also positive. Therefore, we just proved that for positive integers $x$ and $y$, all positive integers bigger than $mn$ are in the set described in the question.   
  
Part (B).  
  
Consider the set $J' =$ {$\frac{j}{d} \mid j \in J$}. If we show for any integer $k$ in $J'$ that is bigger than some threshold $K$, all but a finite number of nonnegative integers are in $J'$, then we can conclude for any integer $k$ in $J$ that is bigger than $Kd$, all but a finite number of nonnegative integers are in $J$  
  
By construction, the greatest common divisor of $J'$s elements is one and also $J'$ is closed under addition. Now, consider an arbitrary element in $J'$ and let us denote it by $a$. The set of remainder of $J'$s elements when divided by $a$ is $R = \{j' \pmod{a} \mid j' \in J' \}$. Since the greatest common divisor of $J'$ is one, the greatest common divisor of $R$ is also one. Therefore, $R$ forms the residue system modulo $a$, i.e., $R = \{0, 1, \dots a - 1\}$, where for each element of $r \in R$ there exits at least one element in $J'$ denoted by $j'_r$ such that $j'_r \equiv r \pmod{a}$. Let us denote the largest representative of these elements by $K$:  
  
$$K = \max \left\{j'_0, j'_1, \dots j'_{a - 1} \right\}.$$  
  
Now we show that any integer bigger than $K$ is in $J'$. Let $k$ be an integer bigger than $K$ and let its remainder when divided by $a$ be $r$, i.e., $k = r \pmod{ a}$. We know that there is an element in $J'$ with same remainder, i.e., $j'_r$, therefore:  
  
$$k = j'_r + c\cdot a,$$  

for some integer $c$. Since $k > M$ and $j'\_r \leq M$, $k - j'\_r > 0$ and $c \cdot a$ is positive multiple of $a$.  
Since $j'\_r, a \in J'$, and $J'$ is closed under addition, both $j'\_r$ and $c \cdot a = \underbrace{a + a + \dots + a}_{c\, \mathrm{times}}$ are in $J'$.  
Therefore, their sum, $k$, must also be in $J'$. This proves that $J'$ contains all integers greater than $K$. 
Consequently, $J$ contains {$(K + 1)d, (K + 2)d, \dots$}, which completes the proof.

- What is an ergodic Markov chain?

_answer_.

It's an aperiodic, irreducible, and recurrent Markov chain:

Aperiodic:
The period of the chain is one.

Irreducible:
If there is only one communication class, i.e., if for all $i, j$ there exists an $n = n(i,j)$ with $P_n(i,j) > 0$, then the chain is called irreducible.

Recurrent:
If the chain starts in a transient class (set of states), then with probability one it eventually leaves this class and never returns. Classes with this property are called transient classes and the states are called transient states. Other classes are called recurrent classes with recurrent states. A Markov chain starting in a recurrent class never leaves that class.

- Why is the left eigenvector of a transition matrix with the eigen value of one equal to the stationary distribution of the Markov chain modelled by the transition matrix?

_answer_. 

Suppose $\bar{\pi}$ is the stationary distribution and $P$ is the transition matrix. Then, we know that since all rows of $P^\infty$ are the same, then for any initial any probability vector $\bar{v}$ we have

$$\bar{\pi} = \lim_{n \to \infty} \bar{v}P^n.$$

Hence, we have,

$$\bar{\pi} = \lim_{n \to \infty} \bar{v}P^{n + 1} = \left(\lim_{n \to \infty} \bar{v}P^{n}\right)P = \bar{\pi}P.$$

The above display is a left eigenvector of $P with eigenvalue one.

Source: [Introduction to Stochastic Processes](https://archive.org/details/introduction-to-stochastic-process-lawler/mode/1up?view=theater)  