---
title: "What to remember from RLC 2025"
permalink: /posts/2025/08/rlc/
date: 2025-09-6
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

# Day 1:

What I learned from Clare Lyle at Finding the Frame workshop:
1. Clare is in pretty good shape, comparison to her made realize 
I definitely should give my best to stay in a good _really_ shape.
2. She does blogging [here](https://clarelyle.com/archive.html)
explaining math/reesrch materissl and also life lessons. It made me realize I should do 
that too to have a clearer mind
3. As of August 5th, 2025, I'm learning stuff that she learned in her [2nd year of undergrad](https://clarelyle.com/posts/2016-04-28-firstyearproofs.html). This made me realize that I should temper my
expectations, be much more humble, try harder to acquire those knowledge too. We've roughly started our undergrad at 
the same time and compared to how I was behaving in my 2nd year, she is miles ahead and throughout the years the drift 
has exponentially grown; _I shouldn't expect to close the gap overnight_. Can I close the gap? Let's be straight,
__N0__. But, _the best time to plant a tree was 20 years ago. The second-best time is now_.
4. She was asked: "How do you choose a topic/research question out of this huge world to do research on?"
Her answer:
> I usually take something that works really well and test it on a setting that it doesn't work
> well anymore. Then, I try to figure out why it isn't working. This
> Approach results in a cycle of questioning and answering that leads to interesting research.

Mark Ho:
> Psychology is hard because we can't observe the mental state of people but only the outcome.

# Day 2:

Leslie:

You can denote a histroty dependent policy by: $\pi: (O, A)^* \to A$

Dale:
> Develop Computer Science perspective as well as the machine learning perspective.

# Day 3:

- An average person like me that doesn't have solid scientific understanding/background, if that person isn't in a good
shape physically, then that person wouldn't stand a chance to remain stable mentally when faces someone like Clare Lyle.
Because she's scientifically and physically in an extremely good shape and the comparison wouldn't give a run on their
money. I must at least get in a good shape physically to not lose it at leasr in that regard.

Joelle Pineau:
> The definition of _value_ is different in Economics, Ethics, sociology, etc.

I really consider her as a theoretician but her notation on value function was really sloppy. Takeaway is that even 
people who do formalisms can have sloppy notations on _keynote_ talk.

Bandit orals:
- Use empirical experiments to demonstrate your theoretical results.

Michael Littman:

You can represent a dataset by: $D = \langle s, a, r, s'\rangle^+$

# Day 4:

Peter Dayan:
 
- A book to read: "Advice for young investigator"

He revisited the idea of liking vs wanting and blew me away. Wanting is a beneficial process, but slow. Liking is
fragile and not necessarily beneficial. The analogy is _tongue_ vs. _stomach_. Tongue swiftly process sweet food and 
most people like (instant gratification), but it's stomach who actually process what your body wants and results in
long-term satisfaction.

Rich:
> The biggest limitation in the quest of AI is inefficient learning algorithms.

[Rich's Dyna with function approximation](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1cMJWR90IkMxWngWpjOtD-qdLS_a7KiYL).